### 7.18

Let a **prime** attribute be one that appears in at least one candidate key. 
Let $\alpha$ and $\beta$ be sets of attributes such that $\alpha \rightarrow \beta$
holds, but $\beta \rightarrow \alpha$ does not hold. Let $A$ be an attribute that is 
not in $\alpha$, is not in $\beta$, and for which $\beta \rightarrow A$ holds. We say
that $A$ is **transitively dependent** on $\alpha$. We can restate the definition 
of 3NF as follows: A relation schema $R$ is in 3NF with respect to a set $F$ of functional 
dependencies if there are no nonprime attributes $A$ in $R$ for which $A$ is transitively
dependent on a key for $R$. Show that this new definition is equivalent to the original one.  

---
<br><br>
Two equivalent definitions of 3NF are as below:

<b>Def1</b>
<i>  
Any regurlar(non-prime) attributes do not have any **transitive dependencies** on the **primary key**</i>

<b>Def2</b> <i>
$\forall \ \alpha\rightarrow\beta$, one of the below holds

1. $\beta \subseteq \alpha$ (trivial)
2. $\alpha$ is a superkey
3. $\beta - \alpha$ consists only of **prime attributes**.</i>

---
#### Def1 $\rightarrow$ Def2




Let any non-trivial $\alpha \rightarrow \beta$ be given. It suffices to show that this functional dependency satisifies one of the three conditions of **Def2** under the assumption of **Def1**. Suppose the statement of **Def1** holds for now.

If $\beta - \alpha$ does not contain any non-prime attributes, it satisifies the 3rd condition and there is nothing left to prove further. Therefore, we consider only the case where $\beta - \alpha$ contains a non-prime attribute $A$; thus $\alpha \rightarrow A$ 

Let's show that if $\alpha$ is not a super key, there exists a transitive dependency. Let $P$ denote the primary key. 

Suppose $\alpha$ is not a super key. Then $\alpha \nrightarrow P$ & $P \rightarrow \alpha$ 

Since $A$ is a non-prime attribute, $A \notin P$ and $A \notin \alpha$. Along with $\alpha \rightarrow A$, we establish the transitive dependency $P \rightarrow \alpha \rightarrow A$. This scenario leads to a contradiction.

---

#### Def2 $\rightarrow$ Def1

Let any regular attribute $A$ be given. 

Let's show that $A$ does not have any transitive dependency on the primary key under the assumption of **Def2**.



Let $P$ denote the primary key. Now suppose there exists a set of attributes $\alpha$ s.t. $\alpha\rightarrow A$, $\alpha \wedge A = \empty$ and $\alpha \nrightarrow P$ for contradiction.

1. $\alpha \rightarrow A$ is not trivial since $\alpha \wedge A = \empty$.
2.  $\alpha$ is not a super key since $\alpha \nrightarrow P$.
3. $A - \alpha = A$ is not a prime attribute by the assumption.

Contradiction

**QED.**



